[Music]
Before we take a look at some of the
more straightforward differences between
Kotlin and Java, we're going to take a
closer look at variable declarations,
because pretty much any code we write
will have variables or parameters and
I don't want you to keep looking at the
declarations and wondering what's going on.
Now, Kotlin uses type inference
and what this means is that the compiler can
usually figure out or infer the type of
a variable based on the context in which
you're using it and this has done at
compile time not at runtime, Kotlin is a
statically typed language so the type of
every expression is determined and known
at compile time. So let's create a
new Kotlin project so we can play around
with variable declarations, I'll do it a
little slowly so that you can see how to
create a project again, but from this
point forward I'll go through creating a
project really quickly, so you go to file
new, project. You want to make sure Kotlin
is selected on the left hand side and
Kotlin jvm on the right hand side
and click Next, we'll call this one
declarations and we'll click finish
and I'm going to have the project open in
the same window. And once again, we have a
bare-bones Kotlin project, so let's
create a package, we'll expand the node
right click on the source folder, go to
new package and we'll call this one
academy.learnprogramming.declarations,
click OK. Now let's create a Kotlin
file and we'll just call this one
declarations. All right, let's
add our main method the same way we did before,
just typing in main and then hitting enter.
Now, every variable declaration
begins with val, v-a-l or var v-a-r.
val means the variable is immutable,
it can only be assigned once and then
you can't change the value and this is
equivalent to final in Java so when you
have a final variable in Java you can
assign it once and then that's it,
that's what val variables are. So let's start by
declaring a val variable called number.
Now, you'll notice
that we have an error if we hover
over it, it will say this variable must either
have a type annotation or be initialized,
so the reason that we have the error
is because at this point the compiler can't
infer the type, remember I mentioned
that Kotlin uses type inference, so the
compiler will look at this and say
I still don't have a clue what data type
number is supposed to be, I'm going to
need a little bit more of a hint.
So, there's two ways we can fix this, we can
assign an initial value so let's just
assign 25 and then you'll notice that the
error goes away, and in this case
the compiler is going to make number and int
because just as in Java, the default
datatype for whole numbers is integers,
so it's going to say fine I'll make number
an int. So the other way we can do it is
to just tell the compiler what we want,
so we can say we want an int and that's
the second way that we can do it.
So as you can see, we have the variable name
first and then a colon and then the data
type, so this is the way that we write a
variable declaration in Kotlin, we start
with val or var and then variable name
colon datatype. So in this case, we're not
explicitly assigning a value, but that's
okay because we told the compiler what
data type we want and so it's cool.
It knows we want an int. Now we can do both,
I mean we could also assign an
initial value here but in Kotlin normally you
don't do it that way, there are a few
times when you have to, if you want the
datatype you want and I'll show you an
example of that in just a second but
normally in Kotlin if you assign an
initial value, that's good enough for the
compiler to figure out the type and so
you'll see it written like this.
in Kotlin more than you will, with including
the datatype because if you give the
compiler both types of information
you're kind of clobbering it over the
head and Kotlin is trying to reduce the
amount of typing you have to do,
so you don't need to give the compiler the same
information twice, but what if we want it
number to be a short, we're not going to
get a short doing it this way because
the default datatype for whole
numbers is an int so the compiler is
going to look at this and say 25 whole
number int so this is one of the cases
where we'd have to actually include both
types of information, if we wanted this
to be a short, because giving the initial
value isn't enough to get the compiler
to do what we want it to do and it's the
same thing with floating type numbers,
we're going to cover datatypes in more
detail later, but just as in java double
as the default, so sometimes you have to
explicitly tell the compiler that you
actually want a float, but for now let's
go back to just giving it the type,
so this is a val variable so we can only
assign it once within the block of code
that it's declared. So let's do that,
let's assign it ten so number equals ten,
that's fine not a problem, but if we try
to assign it again, we'll get an error
and the error will be val cannot be
reassigned, so let's change val to var,
and now you'll see two things happen.
First, of all the error goes away and secondly now,
number is underlined so we can now change
the value because it's a var variable,
and var variables are mutable,
you can change their values as often as
you want. The compiler will underline var
variable so that you can tell at a
glance which variables are mutable and
which ones are immutable, if you see a
variable name that's underlined it means
that you can change its value, if it
isn't underlined it means you may be
able to assign it, if it's the first time
but if it's not, then you can't change it.
Now Kotlin recommends that you declare
val or immutable variables whenever possible,
it doesn't enforce this but that's
the recommended and practice and it's good
practice in Kotlin, so try to drill it
into your head that you always start a
variable declaration with val unless
you have a good reason to do otherwise,
and this is different from Java, right?
Because in Java it's the other way
around, you don't declare stuff final
unless you have a good reason for doing so.
Well in Kotlin, they want stuff to be
immutable unless you need to change it
not enforced, but it's considered good practice.
So now we're going to in the same file,
we're going to create a class and don't
worry about the syntax, there's a whole
section on classes in the course,
so don't worry about the syntax, so we're
going to have an employee class, so we'll
start with class employee and then
this is going to look very different to you,
don't worry about it, but we'll have a var
property called name which is going to
be a string and we'll have a val
property called ID, which will be an int,
and we'll have the usual curly braces.
So, we've declared name as var because
you know we're assuming an employee's name
can change and we're declaring the ID as
a val because we're figuring that once
an employee gets assigned an ID, that ID
never changes in a real world application,
we probably have first name
and last name but you know, this is just
a demo. So now let's go back to the main
function and we'll declare an employee
variable, so we'll say val employee1
equals employee and let's call this employee
Lynn Jones and we'll give her an ID of 500.
So far so good, so let's assume Lynn
gets married and she decides to take her
husband's name, so we'll change her name
so we'll say employee1.name equals
Lynn Smith and that works.
We don't see an error as you can see name
is underlined because it's mutable
variable, because we've declared it as
var and because it's declared as var,
you're allowed to change it as many
times as you want. I did this to show you
that when a variable is immutable it
doesn't mean the instance properties are
immutable it means you can't assign
another instance to the variable, because
you'll notice that we declared employee1
as val which means it's immutable,
but we can reassign the properties
in employee1, so it's ok for us to change
the values inside an employee instance,
but if we were to try to assign
a different employee instance to employee1,
that would be an error. So let's try it.
Let's assign a different instance.
So let's try employee1 equals employee
and we'll call him let's see, Tim Watson
and we'll give him an ID of 100
and you'll see that we now have an error,
val cannot be reassigned. So again, it's okay
with immutable variables that contain an
instance. It's okay to change the values
of the instance properties, but you can't
assign a completely different instance,
because in here, of course you have an
instance reference and the instance
reference doesn't change when you do this,
but when you're assigning
a completely different instance, it does
so you're not allowed to do that with val variables.
Now, I did say that the rule
for val variables is that you're allowed
to assign it once, within the block of
code where it's defined and there are
cases then where the compiler can
guarantee that the variable is only
going to be assigned once, even though
it might look like it's being assigned
more than once. So let's get rid of this,
so that we can get rid of the error.
Let's declare another employee,
and this time we won't assign an initial value
right there and then let's declare a
number2 variable, which we're just going
to use in a silly if statement,
that doesn't mean anything just to
demonstrate that what we mean by you can
assign a variable once in a block.
So now, we'll type if number is less than number2,
which it is. Then we'll assign
employee2 the name Jane Smith,
and we'll give Jane an ID of 400, else we'll
assign employee2 the name Mike Watson
and we'll give him an ID about 150.
So, we don't have an error here even
though aal is immutable because we're
only assigning at once the compiler can
guarantee that employee2 is only going
to be assigned once, because either the
if code will be executed or the else code
will be executed, so this would be okay,
okay and it's the same thing with final
variables in Java, but I just thought I'd
illustrate that the same thing applies in Kotlin.
Okay, so the compiler as we've seen,
can infer the type of a variable
sometimes, depending on the context but
that doesn't mean that the type of the
variable can change like for example,
we can't do something like this.
That gets us an error as we can see, type mismatch
required int and found string.
So you can't change the data type of a variable
on the fly, I mean sure the compiler can
tell here that you want to assign
a string, but the type is fixed at
declaration time. So you can't change
variable types on the fly even though
the compiler can figure out types,
without you having to tell it and that's
it for this video. I just want it to give
you a quick overview of variable.
I'll see you in the next one.